Sea Change by Howard Marks.
In my 53 years in the investment world, I’ve seen a number of economic cycles, pendulum swings,
manias and panics, bubbles and crashes, but I remember only two real sea changes. I think we may
be in the midst of a third one today.
As I’ve recounted many times in my memos, when I joined the investment management industry in 1969,
many banks – like the one I worked for at the time – focused their equity portfolios on the so-called
“Nifty Fifty.” The Nifty Fifty comprised the stocks of companies that were considered the best and
fastest-growing – so good that nothing bad could ever happen to them. For these stocks, everyone was
sure there was “no price too high.” But if you bought the Nifty Fifty when I started at the bank and held
them until 1974, you were sitting on losses of more than 90% . . . from owning pieces of the best
companies in America. Perceived quality, it turned out, wasn’t synonymous with safety or with
successful investment.
Meanwhile, over in bond-land, a security with a rating of single-B was described by Moody’s as “failing
to possess the characteristics of a desirable investment.” Non-investment grade bonds – those rated
double-B and below – were off-limits to fiduciaries, since proper financial behavior mandated the
avoidance of risk. For this reason, what soon became known as high yield bonds couldn’t be sold as new
issues. But in the mid-1970s, Michael Milken and a few others had the idea that it should be possible to
issue non-investment grade bonds – and to invest in them prudently – if the bonds offered enough interest
to compensate for the risk of default. In 1978, I started investing in these securities – the bonds of
perhaps America’s riskiest public companies – and I was making money steadily and safely.
In other words, whereas prudent bond investing had previously consisted of buying only
presumedly safe investment grade bonds, investment managers could now prudently buy bonds of
almost any quality as long as they were adequately compensated for the attendant risk. The U.S.
high yield bond universe amounted to about $2 billion when I first got involved, and today it stands at
roughly $1.2 trillion.
This clearly represented a major change in direction for the business of investing. But that’s not the end
of it. Prior to the inception of high yield bond issuance, companies could only be acquired by larger firms
– those that were able to pay with cash on hand or borrow large amounts of money and still retain their
investment grade ratings. But with the ability to issue high yield bonds, smaller firms could now acquire
larger ones by using heavy leverage, since there was no longer a need to possess or maintain an
investment grade rating. This change permitted, in particular, the growth of leveraged buyouts and what’s
now called the private equity industry.
However, the most important aspect of this change didn’t relate to high yield bonds, or to private
equity, but rather to the adoption of a new investor mentality. Now risk wasn’t necessarily avoided,
but rather considered relative to return and hopefully borne intelligently. This new risk/return
mindset was critical in the development of many new types of investment, such as distressed debt,
mortgage backed securities, structured credit, and private lending. It’s no exaggeration to say today’s
investment world bears almost no resemblance to that of 50 years ago. Young people joining the
industry today would likely be shocked to learn that, back then, investors didn’t think in
risk/return terms. Now that’s all we do. Ergo, a sea change.
At roughly the same time, big changes were underway in the macroeconomic world. I think it all started
with the OPEC oil embargo of 1973-74, which caused the price of a barrel of oil to jump from roughly
$24 to almost $65 in less than a year. This spike raised the cost of many goods and ignited rapid
inflation. Because the U.S. private sector in the 1970s was much more unionized than it is now and many
collective bargaining agreements contained automatic cost-of-living adjustments, rising inflation triggered
wage increases, which exacerbated inflation and led to yet more wage increases. This seemingly
unstoppable upward spiral kindled strong inflationary expectations, which in many cases became selffulfilling, as is their nature.
The year-over-year increase in the Consumer Price Index, which was 3.2% in 1972, rose to 11.0% by
1974, receded to the range of 6-9% for four years, and then rebounded to 11.4% in 1979 and 13.5% in
1980. There was great despair, as no relief was forthcoming from inflation-fighting tools ranging from
WIN (“Whip Inflation Now”) buttons to price controls to a federal funds rate that reached 13% in 1974.
It took the appointment of Paul Volcker as Fed chairman in 1979 and the determination he showed in
raising the fed funds rate to 20% in 1980 to get inflation under control and extinguish inflationary
psychology. As a result, inflation was back down to 3.2% by the end of 1983.
Volcker’s success in bringing inflation under control allowed the Fed to reduce the fed funds rate to the
high single digits and keep it there over the rest of the 1980s, before dropping it to the mid-single digits in
the ’90s. His actions ushered in a declining-interest-rate environment that prevailed for four
decades (much more on this in the section that follows). I consider this the second sea change I’ve
seen in my career.
The long-term decline in interest rates began just a few years after the advent of risk/return
thinking, and I view the combination of the two as having given rise to (a) the rebirth of optimism
among investors, (b) the pursuit of profit through aggressive investment vehicles, and (c) an
incredible four decades for the stock market. The S&P 500 Index rose from a low of 102 in August
1982 to 4,796 at the beginning of 2022, for a compound annual return of 10.3% per year. What a period!
There can be no greater financial and investment career luck than to have participated in it.
An Incredible Tailwind.
Similarly, although most of us believe the free market is the best allocator of economic resources,
we haven’t had a free market in money for well over a decade. The Fed might prefer to reduce its
role in capital allocation by being less active in controlling rates and holding mortgage bonds.
• There must be risks associated with the Fed keeping interest rates stimulative on a long-term
basis. Arguably, we’ve seen most recently that doing so can bring on inflation, though the
inflation of the last two years can be attributed largely to one-off events related to the pandemic.
• The Fed would probably like to see normal interest rates high enough to provide it with room to
cut if it needs to stimulate the economy in the future.
• People who came into the business world after 2008 – or veteran investors with short memories –
might think of today’s interest rates as elevated. But they’re not in the longer sweep of history,
meaning there’s no obvious reason why they should be lower.
These are the reasons why I believe that the base interest rate over the next several years is more
likely to average 2-4% (i.e., not far from where it is now) than 0-2%. Of course, there are
counterarguments. But, for me, the bottom line is that highly stimulative rates are likely not in the cards
for the next several years, barring a serious recession from which we need rescuing (and that would have
ramifications of its own). But I assure you Oaktree isn’t going to bet money on that belief.
What we do know is that inflation and interest rates are higher today than they’ve been for 40 and 13
years, respectively. No one knows how long the items in the right-hand column above will continue to
accurately describe the environment. They’ll be influenced by economic growth, inflation, and interest
rates, as well as exogenous events, all of which are unpredictable. Regardless, I think things will
generally be less rosy in the years immediately ahead:
• A recession in the next 12-18 months appears to be a foregone conclusion among economists and
investors.
• That recession is likely to coincide with deterioration of corporate earnings and investor
psychology.
• Credit market conditions for new financings seem unlikely to soon become as accommodative as
they were in recent years.
• No one can foretell how high the debt default rate will rise or how long it’ll stay there. It’s worth
noting in this context that the annual default rate on high yield bonds averaged 3.6% from 1978
through 2009, but an unusually low 2.1% under the “just-right” conditions that prevailed for the
decade 2010-19. In fact, there was only one year in that decade in which defaults reached the
historical average.
• Lastly, there is a forecast I’m confident of: Interest rates aren’t about to decline by another
2,000 basis points from here.
As I’ve written many times about the economy and markets, we never know where we’re going, but
we ought to know where we are. The bottom line for me is that, in many ways, conditions at this
moment are overwhelmingly different from – and mostly less favorable than – those of the post-GFC
climate described above. These changes may be long-lasting, or they may wear off over time. But in my
view, we’re unlikely to quickly see the same optimism and ease that marked the post-GFC period. 
What are the factors that gave rise to investors’ success over the last 40 years? We saw major
contributions from (a) the economic growth and preeminence of the U.S.; (b) the incredible performance
of our greatest companies; (c) gains in technology, productivity and management techniques; and (d) the
benefits of globalization. However, I’d be surprised if 40 years of declining interest rates didn’t play
the greatest role of all.
Of course, all of the above flipped in the last year or so. Most importantly, inflation began to rear its head
in early 2021, when our emergence from isolation permitted too much money (savings amassed by people
shut in at home, including distributions from massive Covid-19 relief programs) to chase too few goods
and services (with supply hampered by the uneven restart of manufacturing and transportation). Because
the Fed deemed the inflation “transitory,” it continued its policies of low interest rates and quantitative
easing, keeping money loose. These policies further stimulated demand (especially for homes) at a time
when it didn’t need stimulating.
Inflation worsened as 2021 wore on, and late in the year, the Fed acknowledged that it wasn’t likely to be
short-lived. Thus, the Fed started reducing its purchases of bonds in November and began raising interest
rates in March 2022, kicking off one of the quickest rate-hiking cycles on record. The stock market,
which had ignored inflation and rising interest rates for most of 2021, began to fall around year-end.
From there, events followed a predictable course. As I wrote in the memo On the Couch (January
2016), whereas events in the real world fluctuate between “pretty good” and “not so hot,” investor
sentiment often careens from “flawless” to “hopeless” as events that were previously viewed as
benign come to be interpreted as catastrophic.
• Higher interest rates led to higher demanded returns. Thus, stocks that had seemed fairly valued
when interest rates were minimal fell to lower p/e ratios that were commensurate with higher
rates.
• Likewise, the massive increase in interest rates had its usual depressing effect on bond prices.
• Falling stock and bond prices caused FOMO to dry up and fear of loss to replace it.
• The markets’ decline gathered steam, and the things that had done best in 2020 and 2021 (tech,
software, SPACs, and cryptocurrency) now did the worst, further dampening psychology.
• Exogenous events have the ability to undercut the market’s mood, especially in tougher times,
and in 2022 the biggest such event was Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
• The Ukraine conflict reduced supplies of grain and oil & gas, adding to inflationary pressures.
• Since the tighter monetary policies were designed to slow the economy, investors focused on the
difficulty the Fed would likely have achieving a soft landing, and thus the strong likelihood of a
recession
The anticipated effect of that recession on earnings dampened investors’ spirits. Thus, the fall of
the S&P 500 over the first nine months of 2022 rivaled the greatest full-year declines of the last
century. (It has now recovered a fair bit.)
• The expectation of a recession also increased the fear of rising debt defaults.
• New security issuance became difficult.
• Having committed to fund buyouts in a lower-interest-rate environment, banks found themselves
with many billions of dollars of “hung” bridge loans unsaleable at par. These loans have saddled
the banks with big losses.
• These hung loans forced banks to reduce the amounts they could commit to new deals, making it We’ve gone from the low-return world of 2009-21 to a full-return world, and it may become more
so in the near term. Investors can now potentially get solid returns from credit instruments,
meaning they no longer have to rely as heavily on riskier investments to achieve their overall return
targets. Lenders and bargain hunters face much better prospects in this changed environment than
harder for buyers to finance acquisitions.they did in 2009-21. And importantly, if you grant that the environment is and may continue to be
very different from what it was over the last 13 years – and most of the last 40 years – it should
follow that the investment strategies that worked best over those periods may not be the ones that
outperform in the years ahead.
That’s the sea change I’m talking about.